📌 1. What is Python?

Python is a high-level, interpreted, and general-purpose programming language.

Created by Guido van Rossum and released in 1991.

Emphasizes code readability with a clean and simple syntax (like English).

📌 2. Features of Python

Feature	Description:
Easy to Learn & Use	Simple syntax, suitable for beginners.
Interpreted Language	No need for compilation. Code runs line by line.
Dynamically Typed	No need to declare data types explicitly.
High-Level Language	Abstracts low-level memory management.
Platform Independent	Runs on Windows, Mac, Linux, etc.
Extensive Libraries	Supports NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, Django, Flask, etc.
Object-Oriented & Procedural	Supports both programming paradigms.
Open Source	      Free to use and distribute.

📌 3. Applications of Python
Web Development – using Django, Flask.

Data Science & Machine Learning – with Pandas, NumPy, Scikit-learn.

Automation/Scripting – automate repetitive tasks.

Game Development – using Pygame.

Desktop Applications – Tkinter, PyQt.

IoT, Cybersecurity, AI, Cloud Computing – expanding rapidly.

📌 4. Python Installation & Setup
Download from https://www.python.org

Use IDEs like:

IDLE – built-in

PyCharm

VS Code

Jupyter Notebook

To verify installation:


python --version


Jupyter installation:

✅ Option 1: Using Anaconda (Recommended for Beginners)
Step 1: Download Anaconda

Go to: https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution

Download the installer for your operating system (Windows/Mac/Linux).

Step 2: Install Anaconda

Run the downloaded installer and follow the instructions:

Select "Just Me"

Click "Next" → Choose destination folder → Click "Install"

Check the option: "Add Anaconda to PATH environment variable" (optional, but helpful)

Click "Finish"

Step 3: Launch Jupyter Notebook

Open Anaconda Navigator from the Start Menu

Click on "Launch" under Jupyter Notebook

It will open in your browser at: http://localhost:8888

✅ Option 2: Using pip (If You Already Have Python Installed)
Step 1: Check if Python is Installed

Open Command Prompt or Terminal and type:


python --version
If not installed, download from: https://www.python.org/downloads/

Step 2: Install pip (if not available)

Most Python installations include pip.

To check:


pip --version
Step 3: Install Jupyter Notebook

In the terminal or command prompt, type:


pip install notebook
Step 4: Run Jupyter Notebook

Start the notebook with:


jupyter notebook
It will open in your browser.

✅ To Stop the Notebook
Go back to the terminal where Jupyter is running

Press Ctrl + C to stop

Confirm with y and press Enter

💡 Tips:
You can create .ipynb files directly in the browser using Jupyter

Use ! to run terminal commands inside the notebook (e.g., !pip install pandas)

You can also install JupyterLab (a more advanced interface):


pip install jupyterlab

2nd way:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

✅ Step 1: Install Python
If Python is not already installed:

Go to: https://www.python.org/downloads/

Download and install the latest version of Python (e.g., Python 3.10 or above).

✅ During installation, make sure to check the box that says:

"Add Python to PATH"

✅ Step 2: Open Command Prompt / Terminal
Windows: Press Win + R, type cmd, and press Enter.

Mac/Linux: Open Terminal.

✅ Step 3: Upgrade pip (Optional but Recommended)

python -m pip install --upgrade pip
✅ Step 4: Install Jupyter Notebook Using pip

pip install notebook
This will install Jupyter and its dependencies.

✅ Step 5: Run Jupyter Notebook
Once installed, launch it using:

jupyter notebook
It will open your default browser with the Jupyter dashboard.

You can create new notebooks from there.

✅ (Optional) Install via Anaconda (Alternative Method)
Anaconda comes pre-installed with Jupyter and many libraries:

Download Anaconda: https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution

Install it and launch Anaconda Navigator

Click Launch under Jupyter Notebook

✅ Useful Tips
To stop the server, go back to the terminal and press Ctrl + C twice.

To install Jupyter in a virtual environment:

python -m venv jupyter_env
jupyter_env\Scripts\activate   # For Windows
source jupyter_env/bin/activate  # For macOS/Linux
pip install notebook